---
layout: post
title:  "Home Sweet Home"
date:   2015-08-02 19:38:00
categories:
  - Technology
  - iOS
  - Multitasking
excerpt: ""
---

What's your iPhone homescreen look like? Perhaps you have that one game that was really popular a couple months ago but have since stopped playing still sitting on your dock. Or maybe you have a few default apps from when you first bought your phone like Camera and Clock still taking up the first few rows on your first page. You probably also have almost half a dozen pages of apps that somehow get more and more chaotic the farther right you go, a few of which containing a bunch of folders that at one point contained a small set of relevant apps but have since ballooned so large it has long since lost sense of whatever it's original purpose was.

Keeping your iPhone's homescreen clean and focused is instrumental to ensuring your phone continues to provide an inviting and functional experience for you. Having a poorly maintained home screen eventually fogs up the experience to the point where it's original simplicity combined with the mucked up organization becomes a hinderance to any chance of efficiency it might have once possessed. Your homescreen is the highway to what's actually important on your phone; your content. Therefore, make your homescreen as efficient and easy as possible to direct you to that content. The last think you want is bumper to bumper traffic anytime you're trying to quickly find that one app. The way to achieve this is fairly simple, take for example your desk at work or school. Do you keep every single book, tool, decoration, and garbage all set on the table equally apart from one another? (I certianly hope not). No, what happens instead is we keep only our most used and precious things at arms reach on our desk, throw away anything we don't want or need anymore, then delegate everything else to a few sets of categorized drawers. This is what you deserve to has as your home screen experience.

You might be thinking "Sure, I've got lots of pages, a handful of old apps I don't use anymore, and tons of folders questionably categorized. I can always find what I'm looking for though, so who care?". I believe there's a few issues with this line of thinking. You see, precisely because you have agreed that your home screen is messy means it's a problem that should be remedied. People become "used" to environments all the time but that doesn't make the environment itself healthy or any less chaotic, the two points are independant of each other.

Poorly organized home screens suffer most from cripling our ability to utilize muscle memory to locate and launch our apps. Muscle memory grants us the wonderful and often underutilized ability to quickly locate things before our brain had time to actively recall where it is. It's because of this power we are able to grab blindly at the counter on our way out for the place we always place our car keys and be able to successfully do so. It's also because of this power we can type with incredible speed and accuracy without having to stop and actively think where certain keys are (or worse have to glance at the keyboard to remember). Muscle memory is not easily built up and not easily changed and the larger and more conveluted your home screen is the more unlikely it is you'll be able to maintain or add to it. That's not good and you deserve better.

But for the sake of debate let's assume you have been somehow able to build up and maintain a perfect spacial and muscle memory map of the countless pages and app folders on your home screen; you still have to then waste swipe and tap cycles navigating to the specific page, specific folder, or (in worst case scenarios) the specific page of a specific folder on a specific page. Yikes. Not only is this cognitive load far greater than any one person should ever have to manage, it's simply inefficient. With just a few minutes of proper thought and execution, however, this can all be a thing of the past.

### Let's Begin With Spring Cleaning

First thing's first, you should consider deleting any of the apps on your phone you don't want anymore. Not only do they add to the clutter they may also be squatting on a nontrivial amount of storage on your iPhone you could be using for more family photos, music, or new apps. To determine which apps are taking up the most space, you can navigate to `General > Usage > Manage Storage` under the "Storage" group to see a list of the largest apps on your iPhone. You can delete the apps directly from this list by tapping on the app you want to delete and selecting "Delete App".

However, please do so with great care and delibration. If there's an app with personal files or data (like game saves) you wish to preserve in case you want to redownload the app again in the future you should first check to see if the developer implemented iCloud backup. If they did, then you could always just redownload the app again and your personal data will be pulled down from the backup automatically. You can determine if the app has it's data backed up to iCloud by going to `General > Usage > Manage Storage`, this time under the "iCloud" group. If your app appears under the "Documents & Data" group then your data is being backed up and you can safetly delete the app back in the "Storage" page or from your home screen. If your app was not listed then I recommend leaving the app as it is until you either decide you no longer want to keep your personal data backed up to iCloud or the developer updates their app to support it (which they should already be doing anyway).

### A Little Home Remodeling Now

Take a moment to consider the apps you use every day without glancing at your iPhone home screen to remember what you have installed, what are they? Surely some jump to mind at first without even having to look. Perhaps it's an app you use every morning as you're in bed waking up for the day, or maybe an app or two that you use during work or school, or maybe even *for* work or school. Whatever the case, take hold of some paper and write all the ones that come to mind on paper (remember, don't cheat by looking at your phone! If it's an app you use every single day you're sure to remember at least what the icon looked like and what it does). You should have at least eight but certainly no more than sixteen or so (do you actually use all sixteen equally each and every day? If the answer is no, then get rid of the ones that you don't). After a few minutes of doing this you should have a nice, small list of your most precious apps laid down before you and from this relatively short list you should then choose one to four that are the most important to you.

Say hello to the members your new home screen.

At this time, you can start wiggle mode and begin moving the apps you just selected to the front page of your home screen and anything else to other pages for now so they're out of the way. Remember to take the one, two, three, or four most important apps you had chosen early and put them in the dock. I wouldn't worry about the specific order of these apps for now. When you're done your front page should exclusively contain the apps you deliberately expressed were important to you and nothing else.

### Categorizing the Heap

Now you've got all your other less important apps strewn about in the other pages and it's time to start making meaningful folders for them to funnel into. What specific folder categories I'd recommend depends on the exact nature of the apps you have. For example, if you have a massive number of games and not much else it doesn't make sense to have just one games folder like I do, instead it would make more sense to group them into folders by genre ("Adventure", "Puzzle", etc.). Since the optimal groups depend greatly on the apps themselves my suggestions will only suit those that also share a similar set of apps, though hopefully I can give you some ideas with how to proceed.

In general (since I prefer to have just one page on my home screen) I like to keep my folders down to an even four which I then put on the top row to act as my folder shelf and also some additional padding to the most used apps so I can reach them easier on the big iPhone 6 screen. My category choices are "Creative", "Games", "Media", and "Services" (which is also where I dump most of the default iOS apps). The categories are very broad but focused:

1. __Creative__: Any apps where I directly create my own document in go here (Diary apps, Note apps, music creation apps like Garageband, etc.). I have also chosen to include apps whose sole purpose is to supplement these creative apps like Dropbox and Metronome so I never have to go far to hop from one to the other.
2. __Games__: You guessed it, all games go here, nothing else to it.
3. __Media__: This could also be called "Relaxing", "Fun", or something along those lines since any app where the sole purpose is consumption of media (Music, iBooks, Netflix, etc.) go in here.
4. __Services__: Anything that provides a website-like service to me (TD Bank, Mail, Maps, App Store, etc.). This is also where I throw all the build in iOS apps that I never use so I don't have to ever trip over them while trying to find something.

As you might guess, within the folders you create is a whole new world of prioritized app sorting. The exact same rules from before still apply; the ones you use most frequently go in the first page of the folder and all the least important ones in the following pages. After all, they're still important, just not "every day" important to you and you should want them to be only a two taps away instead instead of a tap, one or more swipes, and a tap away.

Also, friendly reminder that the *only* apps that should be going into the folders you create are the ones you did not pick as the important ones from the beginning. Those ones, no matter how nicely they fit into the categories, must always be immediately and easily accessible from the home screen's front page. They're important to you, burying them in a folder defeats the purpose of trying to make them more prominant.

### You're Almost There!

Now all you need to do is decide the final order of these various pieces you've created. The only question is, how? This is truly up to personal estetic or usage Do you have few enough folders and apps and want to keep your home screen to just one page like I did?

Now all you need to do is decide the final order of these various pieces you've created. The only question is, what is that order? Only you can answer that as it depends on how much you personally value astetics vs. efficiency. If you put more weight on efficiency then you're best bet is to put your folders and apps together on a single page home screen and sort your apps by thumb distance travel and frequency of use (the apps you use the most should be the easiest to tap). If you instead, however, put more weight on astetics your sorting could be completely different. Perhaps you prefer to sort your apps by icon color even if it doesn't align with your optimal thumb placement, or perhaps you prefer to put all your folders on a second page even if that means you have to swipe once whever you want to reach them. As you might have guessed from looking at my home screen I personally opted for a more efficient sort as keeping the row of folders on the first page with my apps means I can reach all my important apps with my thumb far easier than if the folders were on a second page. Since I prioritized that over looks, I have just a single page and sorted my rows by general app category and thumb distance travel. There is no right answer to this and it's always a work in progress, remember to remain curious and continue trying new arrangments to more finely tune your home screen experience.

### Done

Brew some coffee or tea, sit back, and enjoy the fruits of your efforts. You've now got a phone that more purley and boldly reflects your individual style and values. Remember that muscle memory of any kind takes time to build up so you might have to scan your screen for a moment or two when finding apps for the first week or so but you'll soon adjust and wonder how you ever got by before, especially if you were true to yourself while organizing your home screen with me. Welcome home. ⌘